2,000 heart disease deaths a year in
Europe were due
to the noise that people live in Jesus
the world we live in now that is not how
humans are designed to live Michael
Easter bestselling author journalist
professor of Psychiatry he's on a
mission to save us from the comfort
crisis Crisis crisis is it really a
crisis as a species we evolve to do the
easiest most comfortable thing but we
eventually end up paying a price for it
people are burned out stressed out more
mental health problems and we're looking
for the next pleasure and the industry
really leans into this addiction for
example slot machines once they got rid
of handles and just put a spin button
people went from playing 400 games in an
hour to an average of 900 if you break
that down by minute that's more than we
blink and then we engineered movement
out of our lives with our new job
sitting in these chairs 8 hours a day
now 2% of people take the stairs when
there is also an escalator available and
now we have heart disease the number one
killer of humans globally this drive
that we have to do the most comfortable
thing is a problem as people experience
fewer and fewer Vier problems we don't
become more satisfied we simply start
searching for the next problem really
yes we become unhappier usage of the
word love Haled between 1965 and 2015
and negative words like hate increased
we need to realize that it's your
ancient brain working against you it's
not your fault but it is your problem I
want to take back control how do we
break out of this I call this concept
being a twcenter and if you apply this I
guarantee you will end up healthier and
learn what you're capable of the first
step is
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guest helps us scale the production
and it makes the show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched this show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so so much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here gets better and better and
better and better that is a promise I'm
willing to make you do we have a
[Music]
deal Michael there's a quite obvious
through line throughout your work so I
wanted to ask you if you had to sort of
encapsulate and summarize the mission
that you're on with the work that you do
the books that you write how would you
arize that mission I think that in the
context of today and the world we live
in now you often have to embrace
short-term discomfort to get a long-term
benefit so I think the world is set up
in a way now where things are
easy things are more effortless and
while that is good overall that's a
result of progress I think by not having
moments that press back against us and
this could be everything from taking the
stairs to um being willing to have hard
conversations in your life all those
sorts of things we lose something about
being a human and lose um the things
that keep us healthy and and happy I I
would argue I argue in the comfort
crisis that the things that most impact
your day-to-day life today how you live
everything from Cars uh climate control
to the food system to on and on and on
they're all relatively new in the grand
scheme of time and space they're all new
within the last 100 years I mean here's
a great example
uh digital media the average person
today takes in 12 to 13 hours of digital
media a day the radio was invented maybe
100 years ago that is an insane shift in
how people spend their time and
attention every day and the Brain hasn't
got up no no so we you know a lot of my
work it looks at um looks takes an
anthropological lens really it looks at
how humans were shaped over time and how
we have these adaptations that used to
make sense in these environments where
um what we needed to survive was scarce
uh where the world was hard and
uncomfortable and life took effort and
those things kept us alive right uh but
when you put us in a world where we've
engineered the world to be kind of a lot
easier in a lot of ways where we have an
abundance of all these things that we're
sort of built to Crave everything from
food to stuff to information to even
status and influence we now have an
abundance of all those things and these
sort of ancient drives we have this
ancient Hardware it can backfire in
these new environments so that's called
an evolutionary mismatch what is the the
modern symptoms of that evolutionary
mismatch chronic diseases so for example
you know people didn't really get heart
disease until we started engineering uh
movement out of our lives with our new
jobs and um started eating more because
we had a massive supply of food thanks
to advances in agriculture um I think
there's mental health issues too people
are you know burned out um stressed out
our Collective lack of Fitness I think
too has led to a lot of health issues so
for example um in the past our ancestors
probably were about 14 times more
physically active than us 14 times it's
a crazy
number so when they do uh when
scientists do studies on Hunter gathers
today which are a way to get get to the
ideas of how humans used to live in the
past um groups will generally walk more
than 20,000 steps a day and that's just
an average day now today the average
American and I would assume probably the
average brid as well we're probably um
about in the same place walk anywhere
from you know 4,000 to 5,000 steps a day
that is just so little in the grand
scheme of time and space we had to be
active to to live and survive and um
this drive that we have to do the next
easiest most comfortable thing it often
backfires today I imagine in preparation
for your books you spend significant
amount of time studying hunter gatherer
communities and native tribes and things
like that I'm so fascinated by that so
fascinated because I think most of the
answers we're in search of in our modern
lives exist behind us instead of in
front of us if that makes sense what
have you learned about the differences
in how they lived versus how we live now
you talk there about movement and
activity is there any other sort of
really Central differences that
pertinent to health outcomes yeah I mean
well food is one of them right so as
part of this new book scarcity
brain when you uh when you look at the
diseases that kill humans modern humans
it's heart disease now the crazy thing
about heart disease is that people also
don't worry about it so when you look at
what people worry is going to kill them
it's uh cancer it's Terror attacks it's
you know the crazy Neighbor Next Door
with the gun it's all these whatever
things and heart disease is way down the
list but what actually kills people is
heart disease full stop like that is the
number one killer of humans globally
especially if you live in a developed
country so I have that in the back of my
mind and I come across this paper this
study and it found a tribe in Bolivia
with the healthiest Hearts ever recorded
by
science the reason they don't seem to
get uh heart disease as well as a lot of
other chronic diseases that we get and
that kill us for example they don't seem
to get Alzheimer's um tracks what they
eat and what they eat at some point in
the day which is fascinating is that it
is going to give the middle finger to
every single fat diet you've heard of
over the last 40 years so it's not
necessarily low fat it's not low carb
it's not vegan it's not paleo it's not
ex all these different diets you've
heard of right but the one commonality
that all their food has is that it has
just one ingredient so they're eating
things like foods like rice they're
eating potatoes they're eating red meat
from um Amazonian deer they're eating a
lot of fish they're eating nuts they're
eating fruits they're eating they even
eat sugar right like how many diets do
we have where they're like if you eat a
gram of sugar your kidneys are going to
explode and you're going to die on the
spot right of them and so for me the
takeaway was that um when you look at
what the average person in a developed
uh country eats it's a lot of very Ultra
processed foods so ultr processed foods
are basically that's a euphemism for
junk food it's what scientists use to
describe junk food you know and it's
stuff packed with all sorts of uh
ingredients and triggers that lead us to
overeat more or less so when you take a
food through a ton of processing right
like a Dorito you guys have those in the
UK yeah we have Doritos oh thank
God you concentrate the calories so one
the food
tastes way better than anything you'd
find in the jungle like when I was
living with these people I'm not going
to lie the food was not that delicious
it really wasn't so you you make the
food taste a lot better and you also
concentrate the calories the food
becomes a lot easier to eat you can eat
more faster so there's these interesting
experiments at the NIH where they will
lock people in a lab and they will give
them a
unprocessed diet and then for the next
period of time they will give them an
ultr processed diet a sort of junk food
diet now everything about these diets is
matched like the calories the the carbs
the protein the fat and they say you
know eat as much as you want till you're
full full and when people eat the foods
that have you know fewer ingredients the
unprocessed Foods they end up eating 500
fewer calories a day and they end up
losing weight so that's just one example
of how things have changed so in
scarcity brain in particular you know
I'm looking at
how everything we needed to survive in
the past was scarce and hard to find and
so it made sense to when you got the
opportunity to overdo those things
whether it be food whether it be GA
gathering possessions right tools
whether it be trying to gain status over
other people trying to gain influence
whether it was information and now we
have an abundance of all of those things
right we've got grocery stores packed
with thousands and thousands of foods on
all sorts of Corners uh information
think about the internet the average
person in one day today sees more
information than a person uh 700 years
ago would have seen them their entire
life Jesus entire life think of status
and influence right it used to be that
we would be in these uh tribes of people
that would have maybe 150 people Max and
it was very clear what your sort of rank
was right because we got a leader we got
some whatever but now you can blast out
stuff about yourself to millions of
people one time you talk in your work
about I think that was in the first book
The Comfort crisis about how kind of
sort of adjacent to that being in large
groups is has adverse consequences for
our health and happiness this number 150
people MH in an office space really made
me consider a couple of decisions I've
made what is the what is the basis for
that and what is the the key takeaway so
the number is called dunbar's number and
it's by this researcher uh Robin Dunbar
I hope I got his first name right the
theory is that groups of people um as we
evolved we probably didn't get over 150
people now because of this today when we
have groups of more than 150 people
things get complicated right because
once a group of people gets over 150 you
got to remember a lot more
interconnected relationships you got to
remember a lot more names you got to
remember a lot more faces you got to
remember all these things and oh by the
way now that we have this big group of
people we need to establish laws we need
to establish all these different things
so it gets rather complex and the
takeaway is that this seems to be a lot
of work and stress for for most people
and so living in environments where you
are sort of jam-packed in with fewer
people seems to make most people happier
most of the time so you can sort of
gauge happiness levels where people who
live in the most densely packed cities
tend to be on average uh most unhappy
compared to people who live out in rural
areas of course I'm not saying that
everyone that lives in a densely packed
city is unhappy of course I'm not I'm
just saying on average you compare those
two groups you're going to find that
people who live in uh countrysides and
they're less packed in with groups are
going to be
happier does noise matter noise of the
environment yeah was part of the Comfort
crisis The overarching Narrative of that
book is I spent uh
33 days in the Arctic and um the thing
that I really didn't expect to happen so
in that book I tell the story of my time
in the Arctic and as I experience these
different forms of discomfort that
humans would have experienced in the
past I sort of peel off and explain the
science behind them and other travels I
did about them so in the Arctic it was
unbelievably silent there's no one
around for hundreds of miles I mean one
day we're you know you're standing there
and um I hear
this and I'm
going the hell was that turns out it was
my wristatch it is so silent up there
that you're just standing and you just
pick up the of the second hand which
normally you would have to hold up right
um and so I got curious about
that and what was funny is that humans
have increased the loudness of the world
about fourfold so 100% yep fourfold
since um before we you know became this
species that overtook uh the planet is
the estimate and people tend to get
stressed out when when they're in lots
of noise all the time so if you think
about noise in the past um if you heard
a loud noise it was probably
danger it's a storm rolling in it's an
animal that thinks you would be a
delicious dinner and is letting out a
roar right so we tend to become stressed
when um we hear loud noises now in the
past those were likely infrequent and
today we kind of live in this lowgrade
loudness that seems to um be associated
with
stress and even disease which is
interesting yeah there's a uh there was
this interesting wo study where they
estimated that 2,000 heart attack deaths
a year or heart disease deaths a year in
Europe were due to how loud the the
noise that people live in and that's
simply because um loudness increases
stress and stress is a key factor for
heart
disease it makes me think about the way
we've kind of designed our professional
and personal environments you know like
open plan offices and I mean all my
offices around the world have always
been open plan in your first but Comfort
crisis I think it's chapter 13 where you
start to talk about how that is both bad
for people's anxiety depression and
productivity yeah well and it's funny
because um what I found fascinating
about the studies on that is most people
don't realize that being in a lot of
noise impacts their productivity um but
when you look at what they actually
produce people tend to produce more
better work when they're in more silent
environments
there was one study where one group
worked in a quiet office and one worked
in an open plan office the open plan
office was 50% louder the workers in the
open plan office so they didn't feel any
more stress but stress monitors found
that they were in fact more stressed and
less productive yeah chapter 13 of your
book I'm sorry that I just I was like my
team are going to hear this we've just
had we've just approved the designs for
for our new HQ in the middle of London
well let's uh you know call off the
build yeah Jesus take a look at the
blueprints after this and that's what
staggering anti- anxiety medication use
Rises a relative 28% for every 10 deel
increase in sound in neighborhood in
neighborhood experiences and people who
live nearer to loud roads are 24% more
likely to be depressed yeah it's uh it's
definitely surprising right because we
do live in a lot of noise and another
thing that was interesting while I was
reporting that section on um noise and
sound and how that's changed is that
most people today say that they feel at
first uncomfortable in silence totally
me yeah I think everyone's like that I
can't even sleep without something
playing right so this is a this was a
study in Australia and it was rather
informal but
um yeah people uh would you know take
some time to just be in complete silence
and they all wrote you know At first I
felt really uncomfortable through that
but um on the other side of that they
started to feel better and I think that
that's kind of um a framework for a lot
of things in life it's uncomfortable at
first but when you go through that you
come out of on the other side of it and
you feel like you've improved and you
probably have improved being alone and
being lonely you s as being two very
different things loneliness seems to
be awful for our healths and we're
getting increasingly more lonely decade
by decade but being alone is what's the
distinction between the two how do you
define the difference yeah so lonely to
me is I want to be with others but I
don't have anyone to be with right I
just don't have that resource in other
people being alone is different it's
choosing to take time to be with
yourself and see what you can learn from
that and I think too that there's real
there is some interesting research um on
people who just prefer to be alone they
just like Solitude and turns out that
they're just as happy as super social
people there's a little bit of
individual variation now of course these
people will have you know some people in
their life that they can count on I
think that that is absolutely important
but I do think we've shifted in the last
say 15 20 years where the message is
really you need a bunch of friends to be
happy you absolutely need to be as
social as possible and while I'm not
saying that don't be social that is not
my message at all I am saying that it's
also worth um taking time to be alone
sometimes and seeing what you can learn
from that because I think it does help
you better appreciate those social
moments like for me I never appreciate
my friends more when I've gone off on
some reporting trip into a strange Place
completely alone for a month or whatever
it might be and then come back and I'm
like oh man I really appreciate being
around these people and I don't take
that time for
granted being lonely increases your
chance of dying in the next seven years
by 26% being lonely can shorten your
life by 15 years staggering stats when
you think about the trajectory of travel
that Society is on with machines and
artificial intelligence and all of these
things um it's hard to find it's
understandable how it might be hard for
someone to find mind hope that the stats
are going to turn around and go the
other way as it relates to loneliness
are you concerned at all that the
invention of AI and the speed in which
we're seeing it proliferate is going to
lead to you know some people say sex
robots
and and all of these kinds of things I
mean I read an article the other day
where um a woman is a virtual boyfriend
to hundreds of men and they're paying
because they're using generative AI to
have like seemingly intimate
conversations with her
and the fact that there's demand for
that is a signal of not great things
yeah I think we need I think we
need I mean so then you ask like okay
well why are why are these people doing
that um I think part of it is because
having to go out and interact with
another human is that you don't know is
a little bit awkward and challenging at
first and so to me I mean a big message
of my work is that you have to do
challenging things in order to grow as a
human cuz I guarantee that your
relationship with an actual person is
going to be more rewarding in the Long
Haul than the you know the AI bot or
whatever whatever they call them but it
is hard to go out in public and I think
that we live in a world where you can
you can go okay I'm going to avoid the
hard thing because I can get this thing
that's easier even though it's not going
to be as good for me in the Long
Haul why you I always think when people
commit themselves to writing books
because books are painful processes I
mean it's nice when it's out but it's
not necessarily enjoyable when you're
having to condense your thoughts and put
it pen to paper but there is correlation
and there is a through line between
these two subject matters so it makes me
beg the question why did you of all the
things you could have taken an interest
in or become curious about why did
Michael have a Natural Curiosity towards
this subject matter yeah that's a great
question um I think a lot of it for me
is how I grew up um I grew up with a an
only child of a single parent who had to
travel a lot when I was in my 20s I also
got sober that was not an easy thing
right I was choosing this short-term
relief of alcohol at the expense of
long-term growth and meaning what was
the cost of that oh I mean you're just
an internal mess you know so my I was I
wasn't an interesting case but I I
wasn't the case that most people would
think of in the sense that my life was
totally fine on paper I had a job a
magazine everyone knew you know I had a
house I had a car that sort of thing but
uh internally I was just a total mess
and it's kind of like the walls were
cing in and I tried to quit drinking a
lot of times and finally it just
occurred to me um like this isn't going
to be easy and if you don't do this
you're probably going to die early by
the way and um I realized I had to just
rip off the Band-Aid and do the hard
thing and once I went through that
process my life improved Mo across the
board when you said that internally you
were a
mess how do I gain color on what that
means in reality so that people that are
listening who might be internally a mess
will have a bridge to be able to relate
to what you're saying there oh well so
addiction is really um consistently
choosing a short-term reward at the
expense of long-term growth I knew that
my drinking was causing um problems in
my life across the board I mean like you
know I had less money it was eating into
my bank account it was kind of it was
messing with some of my
relationships um I would never feel good
the 3 days after I would go out on a
bendor right I would just be like a a
mess and um yet I couldn't stop I mean
that's the key right as you go I know
this is screwing me up I know it and
then I tell myself you know what maybe
it'll be different this time like I'm
just G to have one or two drinks this
time and then you have one or two and
you go well if one or two is this good
what would like 10 more be like right
and something shifts in your head um so
it's choosing that short-term um relief
at the expense of long-term growth and
that is a tough cycle I mean I write
about it in scarcity brain about um
addiction and how we think about it
because I think that another thing
that's interesting about today is that
um you know when people hear the word
Addiction they automatically think drugs
they automatically think alcohol but
really if addiction is choosing the
short-term reward at the expense of
long-term growth it really falls on this
big spect
there's plenty of things we all do every
day that that fall into that but it's
just how bad is it hurting you to what
extent um and even the you know the dsm5
which is sort of like the Bible of
psychiatrists the one that they
use it basically puts Addiction on a
spectrum it's like a here's like 11
questions about addiction and if you say
yes to you know four of them then you
got a mild case if you say yes to six of
them you got a medium case and if you
say yes to seven or more you got a
extreme case and like when you read that
you could plug in a bunch of different
behaviors that people do all the time
and go oh I guess I am kind of like
mildly addicted to insert whatever app
you spend way too much time on and um I
think that getting out of that is
ultimately hard and ultimately I I also
see addiction as kind of a symptom of
some underlying thing so for me I think
the reason that I drank is because I had
an office job that I found a little bit
boring um it was rather sanitary
rule-based and as I mentioned before I'm
a person who I do well on Extreme
experiences right and when I would drink
alcohol would allow me to be sort of
wild and free in this world that's
become increasingly sanitary
increasingly rule-based whatever but
that's like not a good way to find that
there's a lot more productive ways to
find that and I can find that now by
applying it to a job that allows me to
go into extreme and interesting places
right and so I think that you know the
message for the average person is that
um once you figure out why you have an
issue in the first place and if you can
figure out okay well how do I apply it
to something that enhances my life that
can that can be a good life
hack I want to zoom in on a particular
moment there which we can all relate to
it's the moment you described where you
have an internal conversation about
having those first two drinks now we can
all relate to that in our own ways I
have internal conversations with myself
once in a while about having the carrot
cake and in my head
like it logically I know that this is
not a good long-term decision right it
could be you know binging on a website
or whatever when you know you've got
other important responsibilities and
priorities in your life that moment
where you have that internal
conversation with yourself it appears to
be the opportunity you have of making a
better longterm decision how on Earth
everyone listening to this will want to
make better long-term decisions how do
we win that battle which is seemingly
with
ourselves it yeah it is in a way with
our cells but it's also I think in a way
with this sort of ancient Hardware that
we have so in the I'll I'll answer this
this way and it might provide some
insight and um we can kind of go from
there so in this book um scarcity
brain there's this underlying question I
have that is you know everyone knows
that everything's fine in
moderation and yet we all suck at
moderation in some way or another in our
life right we all have a thing that
we're not great at moderating let's say
so I live in Las Vegas and I have this
underlying question and Las Vegas is a
fascinating town and um so I want to
know why slot machines work why are they
so good at grabbing
attention now long story short as this
leads me to uh this place on the edge of
town in Las Vegas and it's a brand new
fully working cuttingedge casino but
it's used entirely for research on human
behavior so it's a collaboration with
the gambling industry and a bunch of
different Tech companies so you go into
this place and I went in there and it is
just a it's a real Casino there's hotel
rooms there's like restaurants there's a
coffee bar there's all these different
things that the casino would have like
the slot machines like the poker tables
like the sports book like insert
whatever and while I'm there I end up
talking to a researcher who um designs
slot machines and slot machines work on
what I call the scarcity Loop it is a
three-part Behavior Loop and its three
parts are one opportunity two
unpredictable rewards and three quick
repeatability so one
opportunity you have an opportunity to
get something of value that's going to
enhance your life in the case of a slot
machine it's money right two
unpredictable rewards you know you'll
get that thing of value at some point
but you don't know when and you don't
know how valuable it's going to be so
with slot machines it's like you play
you could lose your money you could win
a couple dollars you could win hundreds
of thousands of dollars it's crazy and
then three quick repeatability you can
immediately repeat the Behavior now the
important part is that and why I'm
talking about this is because that
three-part Behavior Loop it is uh the
most powerful Behavior loop at getting
people to repeat behaviors and get
sucked in it's like the serial killer of
moderation okay and it's now in all
sorts of other Tech and institutions so
for example it's what makes social media
work it's what makes dating apps so
compelling it's being put in um
financial apps like Robin Hood um it's
being leveraged by different um gig work
companies right it explains the rise of
sports betting it's embedded in a lot of
these behaviors that we can't seem to
moderate so when I look at the things
that people aren't good at moderating
whether it's you know I check email way
too much or I check my stocks way too
much and this drives me nuts um it
usually fall it's usually behavior that
falls into those into that scarcity Loop
and so the book unpacks you know what it
is uh where it came from why we get
hooked on it in the first place and I
can explain that please and then where
it um pops up in Modern Life you want to
know where it came from yeah yeah yeah
okay so I had the same question so I
talked to the slot guy and now I'm like
okay I get that gambling and slot
machines are so
compelling I get that this thing is in a
lot of different places but why why in
the first place he just looks at me goes
I don't know like he just makes money
off it he doesn't care
so I end up calling a guy who's a
psychologist at the University of
Kentucky and this guy is an old school
behavioral psychologist like he got his
PhD in 1968 he's been doing research uh
ever since and he explained that it
likely evolv to help us find food in the
past so if you think of humans in the
past you basically had to find food
every day or else you're going to die
but you don't know where the food is and
you don't know how much you're going to
find so you go to point a no food point
B no food Point C ding ding ding jackpot
you find this massive elk that you end
up killing and it feeds you for weeks
right so that is the exact same
architecture as a slot machine you play
the game you don't get anything you play
the game oh it's right there amazing and
you couldn't predict any of that right
and you've got to repeat that behavior
every day for life so we seem to be in
inherently attracted to behaviors that
fall into that Loop because if we
weren't in the past um we wouldn't have
had as much incentive to continue
searching for food and in turn survive
so we still have that sort of ancient
hardware and are we the only ones or is
the rest of the animal kingdom wide in
such a way because one would assume they
would be yeah they are so the the guy
that I spoke to at the University of
Kentucky he does research on
pigeons and pigeons will play a gambling
game that gets them less overall res
resources compared to a predictable game
that gets them more food so we can
basically turn pigeons into these sort
of degenerate gamblers and you see it in
rats you see it in um other primates
yeah so when the rewards unpredictable
for a pigeon they engage in the behavior
more Yep which would again matches up
with your theory that whenever there's
unpredictable Awards associated with an
action we are more engaged because it
falls into that prehistoric Cloud wall
exactly think about um starting a car
okay you start your car um it turns on
every time that's not that exciting
right like it's not going to capture
your attention let's say you turn it on
and it doesn't turn over so you try it
again it doesn't turn over you try it
again it doesn't turn over what are you
going to do you're just going to be like
okay well my car's not starting I'm
going to fix it now what happens if you
go to start your car and it doesn't turn
over but it kind of Putters it goes like
it's going to turn on and then it stops
then you do it again and then it doesn't
do that and so you're like okay well
what's going on so you do it again it
starts to sound like it's going to come
on it's like don't D D D D but then it
doesn't you're going to sit there
messing with that so long as that car is
giving you signs of life right there's
this unpredictability embedded into it
and that'll capture attention of yeah
any animal pretty much and I mean that's
what when I was thinking about I think
it's called like near Miss Theory or
something that you you talk about in
your book that's kind of what that is
when you see you're on like a slot
machine and you see like the Cherry go
nearly you nearly got it you didn't
quite get it but is that called near is
it near Miss Theory or something yeah
near miss so near misses are a term from
the casino industry and in slot machines
let's say you have five reels and you
know you need these bars to line up
these gold bars or whatever they we'll
use cherries that's a better example you
got four cherries line up and if this
fifth Cherry hits you're going to win a
bunch of money now what will usually
happen in slot machines is that fifth
wheel they will be programmed to have
that thing roll longer and longer and
longer so they extend that out cuz you
are sucked in you're like if this thing
lands I'm about to win a bunch of
money and then it
lands but it's not the
Cherry what tends up what ends up
happening is that this leads people to
repeat the behavior quicker actually and
because uh near misses are
mathematically more likely to happen
than actual wins it compels people to
repeat the behavior do they use n misses
as a way to engage us with technology or
anything else in our lives is there like
any other examples within our modern
lives where I know brands or technology
companies are using that as a way to
engage us yeah well you could think if
you
um I mean say you get an update on your
phone let's say you go into Instagram
and you get an update and it's a comment
I mean you could
argue well a comment it could be good it
could be bad is this a comment from like
someone that I think is super cool
that's saying oh that's an amazing photo
you look wonderful on that photo or is
it some troll online going man you look
like a complete idiot in that right so
there's always unpredictability and
embeded in social media it wouldn't work
if you knew what was coming I guess
that's what why so many people just keep
tweeting and posting because it's kind
of like every post comes with a bunch of
likes and you're going you know you
might go viral yeah totally yeah think
of the think of the experience of using
um we'll take uh Twitter um now called X
apparently um so you let's say you have
come up with a a little tweet that you
think is hilarious it's of the moment
right so you put it up and then you wait
right the reals are spinning
and you open the up app back up and
you're like did people like it did they
retweet it and you don't know what what
could have happened it could be so
clever that like oh my God so many
people have retweeted this and this
feels amazing if this happens but it
could have fallen flat and then you're
like now I actually look like an idiot
because I put out a joke and no one
thinks it's funny it's like telling a
joke in front of a room and people just
stare at you right so there's this range
of unpredictable outcomes that could
happen same with scrolling though in a
way I mean you just scroll and scroll
and scroll and you're kind of searching
for that video that's going to provide
you with a hit of something right could
be oh here's some sort of crazy fight
that happened outside of a bar after a
Philadelphia Eagles game because the
fights are always in Philadelphia in the
US um or it could be this video this
amazing heartwarming dog video and that
makes me smile or it could be some
hilarious video that you're just
laughing your butt off until you're kind
of sucked into that waiting for the next
win right you're scrolling scrolling
scrolling and then that's the one that
got me how do we break out of this cuz I
you know I want to take back control
yeah well we all
do um well first I will say that um when
people fall into this loop I like to say
that you're not a bad person because
this is very much part of the human
brain you know people will be hard on
themselves because their screen time is
so high and like why do I keep doing
this thing so you're not a bad person
it's your ancient brain working against
you it's not your fault but it is your
problem you still have to figure out how
am I going to get out get out of this uh
the first step to me is just being aware
of it in the first place so once you
become uh aware of behavior and observe
a behavior it tends to change that's
called the Hawthorne effect and then the
second part is that you can remove or
change any of the three parts of that
Loop that I of the scarcity Loop that I
mentioned so you can remove or change
the opportunity you can REM remove or
change the unpredictable Rewards or you
can remove or change the quick
repeatability you can slow things down
in scarcity brain in chapter four you
talk about something I was also very
very compelled about which is you make
the case that we have an ingrained sense
of not being enough my first book the
last chapter is about this idea of like
not being enough I've always
hypothesized whether humans are built
with a I don't know a message in our
genetic code that tells us where we are
designed and we will struggle forward to
get more like is that hard wide into us
well I think that when you when you look
at how humans behave it seems to be
right and I think it does go back to
Evolution because if you had more of
these things that we need to survive
whether it's food to stuff to
information to um status you would have
a survival advantage and that's still um
built into us I think it still is
advantageous today to a point um now I'm
going to turn the question back on you
so it's like you probably you have that
drive right and that's taken you to a
certain place and now um you have
certain Financial assets and you've sort
of shifted though too your career so now
I'm turning it back on you how do you
feel like that's manifested itself in
your life I it's interesting because in
chapter 7 you talk about this idea of
status and I once upon a time three four
years ago would have told you that I'm
no longer playing status games because
three or four years ago I would have had
flashy things like I had like a Rolex
and like a sports car and designer stuff
now I have none of that the outfit you
see me in now is pretty much the outfit
everyone sees me in always and so I
assumed that I like liberated myself
from the game of status however I read
another book and it was it made the case
that are the status games we all play
just change and in fact it's an anti-
signal now for someone in my position to
have those things so I'm just playing a
different status game maybe the status
game I'm playing is how big can my
podcast be or how good can I be on like
TV or whatever it is MH it's just a
different game so that's kind of where I
think I am now I think I've just changed
the game no I think you're right I think
we all changed the game and we like to
we like to think that we're either not
playing the game or that the game hasn't
changed um everyone's like that so
what's it what's really interesting
about status which I I loved learning
when I was uh reporting about it in the
book is that
um psychological researchers they didn't
really research status all that much
until the 90s and this is because
they didn't want to admit that status is
important to humans because by
researching it you are saying this is
probably important to me so the worst
thing you can do for your status is tell
people that you care about your status
absolutely yet everyone cares about it
and everyone asks oh no I don't care I
don't care what others think about me
it's like yeah you do like let's I'll be
honest everyone cares to some extent
what others think about them in some way
and I think by talking about it and also
understanding why in the first place is
important now the reason why to me is
that the more status and influence that
you would have had in the past uh would
have given you a survival advantage in
the sense that you probably would have
to you probably wouldn't have to do the
crappy like menial labor that burns
energy you probably would have had more
mates you probably would have gotten
more food you probably would have gotten
all these things and still today when
you look at um how status affects Health
people of lower status tend to have
worse Health outcomes Than People of
higher status and so you might think
well this is just because the the higher
status people have more money and they
can go to better hospitals and get
better healthare but the thing is is
that it holds in countries that have
Universal healthare so everyone's
healthare access is pretty much
equal could it not relate to the type of
work they're doing because as you kind
of said earlier I think of if you're
lower status one might assume the type
of work you're doing is constrained MH
low autonomy maybe more isolated
potentially monotonous or less
fulfilling and that might have
physiological
implications um it's interesting people
that are higher status live
longer that's not a nice narrative is it
yeah no and that's the thing it's like
it's not super comfortable to talk about
right um and it definitely affects us
and here's a here's a sort of fun crazy
study that I came across while reporting
scarcity brain is that uh flights that
have a first class cabin they have a
four-fold higher rate of rage compare
compared to flights that don't have a
first class cabin and if the passengers
in second class coach have to walk
through the first class cabin the rate
increases to a ninefold increase in
incidents of air rage what is air rage
people going absolutely nuts on flights
it's like when there's a there's a big
incident with you know the the flight
attendant or someone just losing their
mind and they have to ground plane or
whatever it might be and why do you
think that is well the researchers think
it's because of that massive status
queue of having to walk through first
class and by the way you're not first
class because you're in coach we talked
about um food in your how you covered it
in your first book but in your second
book scarcity brain you talk about food
again specifically you talk quite a lot
about snacking oh yeah snacking what's
the problem with snacking everybody
snacks so this isn't in the
1970s the food industry decided you know
we need to come up with this new
category
of eating and it's eating between meals
snacking now if people are eating three
Square meals um they may not be super
full so they kind of need just these
little meals they can have and they need
to be easy to eat they need to be quick
to eat so they come up with um snack
foods and what's really interesting is
that uh you know I told you about the
scarcity Loop there is a executive in
the food industry who's was talking
about what makes a snack food successful
like how do you sell snack food and he
said it has to have three V's it's got
to have value it's got to have variety
and it's got to have velocity that's
just another way of talking about that
Loop so right it's a good value variety
it's got to have a lot of different
interesting intense flavors and there's
got to be a lot of different options so
when you think about chips or crisps as
you guys you guys call them crisps right
there's a bunch of different flavors
there's like barbecue there's sour cream
there's salsa there's like all these
different flavors and then um velocity
it has to be quick to eat so when you
Ultra process a food as I mentioned
before people tend to eat it faster and
so the industry really leans into this
they create snacking as this totally new
category and this is um in the 70s is
when you really start to see obesity
climb and it's because we just end up
eating more across the day meantime our
activity levels are are dropping there's
a kind of a through line there with
gambling when you talked about velocity
the the speed in which you get the
outcome mhm being short the faster we
can do a Behavior the more likely we are
to repeat the behavior especially if
it's unpredictable so one of the big
advances in Casino technology for
example with slot machines was removing
the handles because you know if you've
um if the machine has a handle you have
to once they got rid of handles and just
put a spin button you can keep your hand
on the button and
just and it basically doubled the rate
of gambling so people went from playing
I think 400 to 500 games in an hour up
to an average of 900 so that's more if
you break that down by minute um it's
more than we
blink interesting yeah with a crazy
range of outcomes too why can't it so if
snacking is a sort relatively new
invention in modern society and it's
it's correlated to the rise in
obesity can we not just measure the
amount of calories that we have like can
we not just do the you know the whole
calories in calories out approach to
staying fit and healthy oh I I think you
absolutely could but I just the question
is are people going to actually do that
I mean I think there's a certain sub you
know there's a portion of the population
that will do that and you know I do
believe that if you were to measure
everything perfectly you have um you
know you could probably lose weight
eating McDonald's and there's people who
have shown this at the same time if you
are eating only McDonald's I can tell
you something you are going to be
starving throughout the day because
foods that are Ultra processed tend to
less filling per calorie than foods that
have just a single ingredient so I want
you to picture um you and I have a bag
of potato chips and then we have a plate
of boiled
potatoes what do you think we could have
more calories
of aren't they the same thing they both
made of
potato the the fried potatoes right
right really the chips so if you like
how you could probably eat an entire bag
of chips if you really set your mind to
it oh yeah but you could e an equivalent
amount of calories and boiled potatoes I
mean it would you would get full like a
quarter of the way through so for
example you know like a boil an ounce of
boiled potatoes might have 50 to 100
calories an ounce of chips might have
200 whatever it is and by the way it's
also not as filling because there's not
as much water content um so when you
process a food you concentrate the
calories and people tend to eat more of
the food I don't eat them anymore but
they to be one of my favorite foods and
in your first book I think you you came
for them which is quasons but I I don't
have those anymore because they make you
feel like and my gut hates them but
you use a crossant as an example of a
food that makes us less full MH yeah so
there's this really interesting study
out of Australia where they um had
people eat a certain amount of different
types of foods and then they had them go
eat at a buffet a certain amount of time
later and measured how much they ate
after and asked them how how full they
were after eating the test food
so they found that the most filling food
per calorie was plain boiled potatoes um
I think after that was just plain white
fish that was a relatively lowfat fish
and then after that I think it was
oatmeal just plain oatmeal and the least
filling Foods were tended to be things
like croissants cookies foods like that
foods that have been um you know we're
we're mixing
flour fat all these sorts of things and
baking it and it's like this nice crispy
thing so it's really a it's a
measurement of how processed a food is
basically a small croissant and white
potato both have about 170 calories but
you'd have to eat seven cants before you
feel the same amount of fullness as one
potato H how much of weight gain is
about the feeling of fullness because
it's not really a concept that I really
thought much about this idea of fullness
I thought
the key thing was calories or not eating
junk food but
fullness well I think that you will
be
Fuller or you will be as full eating
fewer uh and end up eating fewer
calories if the food is not as processed
so the foods just they take up more room
in your stomach they're not packing in
as much calories per
bite let's say for you to be full you
have to eat 10 ounces of
food and we have one food then that has
50 calories per ounce and one food that
has 100 calories per ounce right so if
you were to eat the 10 oun of this food
you're going to eat 500 calories but if
you eat 10 ounces of this food you're
going to eat a thousand and I think that
you extrapolate that across the day and
you start to see oh okay I can see why
choosing foods that help me be more full
on fewer calories could be good if my
goal was to lose weight or not gain
weight compared to F foods that are more
calorie dense what's your position on
fasting I think that it can be a good
weight control tool for some people I
think um it can
constrain like look if you're a person
who's eating around the clock and you go
okay well I'm just going to eat from
noon to whatever 6:00 p.m. or 700 p.m.
you've just cut out a lot of meals um I
also think that if you were to go well
since I'm only eating from noon to 6:00
p.m. um I better eat a ton every single
meal I don't know if you would lose
weight I think there could be definitely
some um health benefits
possibly um but I also think that if
you're doing these extended fast that
could maybe not be great for for muscle
mass so I think it kind of goes back to
like these things are complicated right
and I think it kind of goes back to uh
what is your goal uh how are you trying
to use this tool like what are you doing
this for and then is the way that you're
doing it does it align properly with
your goal but I do I mean I've met
plenty of people who have lost weight
fasting simply because they ate crap for
breakfast and they would stop at
Starbucks on the way um to work and get
some sugary drink and like just by
cutting that out because now they don't
eat till noon like they ended up losing
weight you talk about hungry
days programming two hungry days per
week yes hung day that's one that um has
worked for some people where you could
eat relatively normally say 5 days a
week and then people will eat say 500
calories on their two hungry days so
basically you're just constraining your
calories basically just pulling the
lever of time right um if you can at the
end of the day it
um I think really calories is probably
the best predictor of weight gain or
loss and so the question is okay if you
need to reduce the calories how are we
going to do that and there's a lot of
different ways to do it I think that
fasting is pretty damn simple right it
seems a lot simpler than some of the
other methods out there I was on a a
treadmill many years ago in Boston and I
always tell the story cuz I'd got into
this routine of running like 5 10 kmers
a day every day on the treadmill pretty
much every on the treadmill and I and
when I got to that 510 km Mark I would
typically feel like fatigued and then
there was this one day where I landed in
Boston got on this treadmill that the
distance dial wasn't working so I
couldn't see how far I was running so I
thought well I'll stop when I feel the
usual feeling and I start running and I
start running and I start running and I
start running and I only get off the
treadmill because I'm going to be late
for this appointment that I have and
when I hit the stop treadmill button the
distance pops up and I've run two times
further than I usually run on a
treadmill and I didn't feel the same I
felt fine felt fine and I couldn't
understand that until and I've said this
on stage quite quite often as evidence
that there's clearly something going on
in our psychology that is signaling to
our body that we are at our limits and
that's clearly somewhat of an illusion
and then I read in your first book The
Comfort crisis this idea of where you
talk about mental fatigue does that kind
of marry up to what I'm what I'm saying
oh 100% muscular fatigue sorry our
psychology effects are how we perform
basically and there's a lot of
fascinating studies um similar to yours
where they will uh take people and um
you know they'll give them some sort of
cue like we're gonna run as run as far
as you can um most people are getting
about an hour so they'll give them this
Quee and then they will change the uh
time basically they'll change the clock
so the people maybe have run 40 minutes
in real in reality but they think
they've done you know an hour and 5
minutes which is 5 minutes longer than
some of the better times and they'll be
like okay I'm totally wiped out they'll
do opposite where they slow down time so
these people will have run an hour and
say 30 minutes I'm making up the times
but they think they've run that hour and
five minutes just a little bit better
than the next guy and then they'll then
they'll be like okay I'm totally
fatigued and there's plenty of research
that goes back years that basically says
our psychological perceptions is a key
determinant of um how tired we feel
during exercise cuz at the heart of this
Comfort crisis is our psychological
relationship with discomfort discomfort
to me feels like a story I tell myself
oh it's totally a story yeah what story
are you going to tell yourself right so
here's another great
example your
legs they're they're spasming they're
tired if you're running up a hill it
sucks you want to quit if you're having
sex this is great right like context
really matters about how we feel and so
I think also realizing you know there's
some really fascinating studies
that show we don't recruit all of our um
capacity more or less because uh it's a
defense mechanism right you want to keep
some capacity on board so your brain is
trying to slow you down and shut you
down before you've reached your limit
framing how you want to view how a
workout is going is important right and
I think it can allow you to squeeze a
little more performance out of it now
let's say your brain only allows you to
recruit 50% of your muscle I don't think
you can go I've only gotten 50% and
you're going to get like up to 100 like
doesn't work like that but I do think
running it through like context and
thought and realizing like this actually
isn't as bad and by the way I've chosen
to do this and it's kind of awesome that
I can choose to do this can allow you to
perform a little better I wonder I wish
there was like a magic pill we could
take which allowed us to change the
frame and the story We Tell ourselves
about the discomfort we experience you
know because there's clearly a big group
of people that are able to you know
Ultra Runners and Ultra athletes and all
this stuff but you but this can also be
I mean this isn't just exercise we're
talking about right it's like what story
am I going to tell myself in any given
situation so I get I'll give you a good
example is that um so I spend 33 days in
the Arctic right now to get up to where
the drop off point is you have to take a
bunch of different flights my first
flight is from Las Vegas to uh
Seattle and I hate flying right the
plane is always too hot the seed is
cramped the movies suck on the plane if
you want to go to the bathroom it's just
cramped little closet babies crying it's
just it's
terrible then I go spend a month in the
Arctic where I'm hungry the entire time
if I want water I have to hike down to
the stream and Hike it back up I'm
freezing cold the entire time I'm
sitting in the dirt the entire time if I
want to go to the bathroom I have to
hike out onto the tundra and I got to
bring a rifle because there's grizzly
bears so when I leave that world and I
get back on that flight to Las Vegas
what do you think the flight was like h
amazing this is the most amazing thing
that's ever happened to me right so the
chair I hadn't sat in a chair for more
than a month it's like oh my God this
chair is so incredibly comfortable I'd
been freezing the entire time so that
warm plane I was like oh this plane is
so comfortable so nice and warm I'd been
bored out of my mind up there the whole
time because I don't have any screens or
anything so those movies in the seat
back oh my God this is the most
stimulating thing I've ever watched this
is
incredible um snack food I used to think
the airplane snack food sucked I'm like
oh my God these pretzels amazing and
then when I go to the bathroom right
it's you hit this little red Tab and you
get hot running water that hits your
hands at 35,000 ft and you're moving 600
mes hour through tube of Steel it's like
when that hot water hit my hands it was
incredible so context matters because
once I went and did that that totally
reframed how I think about these
situations that I used to about in
the past and now I can appreciate them
so the reality is is
that the world that we live in today is
amazing in so many ways like full stop
incredible the fact that we have hot
running water on demand the fact that we
have all these different forms of
entertainment the fact that we don't
have to hunt and gather for our food
like we're not forced to do these things
um but we often miss how amazing that is
because we're like the fish thrown in
the water that don't in the water and um
I do think that doing things that push
back against that having experiences
that you throw yourself into they can be
big and small that throw you out of your
comfort zone and give you perspective I
do think that that is important um in
order to live well and get perspective
and have gratitude I mean I still have
times today
where I'll be washing my hands the
water's nice and hot and I'll think back
to that and be like Oh remember when
like hot running water hit your hands
and you got emotional how amazing it is
I mean it's good to have these reminders
that life is pretty amazing right now
we've come pretty far it made me think
that discomfort is an antidote for
happiness in that regard because you
know and also then my it popped into my
brain what I what I used to learn about
the stoic people and how they do that
sort of what hnis adaptation and they
would um remove the pleasantries from
their lives so that they could
appreciate them more yeah we adapt to
what we have so it's like today's
pleasure is tomorrow is just any given
thing and we're looking for the next
pleasure and um there's some interesting
studies about this as well one of my
favorites from the comfort crisis is
this study that found that as people
experience fewer and fewer problems we
don't um become more satisfied we simply
start searching for the next problem
really yes it's called it's a theory it
was discovered by Harvard researchers in
the psychology department and it's the
technical term they call it as
prevalence induced concept change and
you can just think about it as problem
creep Now problem creep creep right so
you know what used to be a problem
yesterday or we're always going to look
for problems it's basically what I'm
trying to say um and they discovered
this where in this study where they
would have people look at a bunch of
different faces and determine you know
is this face threatening or
non-threatening they'd go one face after
another and by the 200th face though
this the scientists started feeding the
participant or the yeah the study
participants fewer and fewer threatening
faces the other study they did two of
these they had them look at research
papers and determine whether the
research papers were ethical or
unethical same deal about Midway through
they start feeding them fewer and fewer
unethical research
proposals now if these two things are
black or white the groups would have
said threatening fewer times as time
went on they would have found fewer and
fewer unethical research proposals
because they've been given less right
because they've been given less but that
didn't happen what they did is they said
said threatening the exact same amount
of times they took faces that were kind
of on the border that they would have
passed up and not said were threatening
before they started deeming those
threatening same with the research
proposals they started getting more
nitpicky now the scientist who I uh
spoke with his name is David lavari yep
getting his name right I remembered it
um he explained that probably in the
past it gave you a survival advantage to
always be looking for the next problem
right cuz if you're a type of person
who's vigilant going okay we might run
out of food that is problematic we got
to fix it um this is a problem let's fix
that if you're Vigilant like that that
would that would help you survive right
but applied to today's world where
you've seen the world get better and
better over
time it often causes us to miss how
amazing it is and pile up first world
problems right so uh there's also
amazing research where researchers will
ask the average American do you think
the world world is improving and only 6%
of people think the world is improving
it's because we look for the next
problem but if you think about that from
like let's take the last 500 years like
of course the world is better you live
longer you're more likely to be literate
you're less likely to be starving you're
less likely to use a child yeah exactly
on and on and on but we often don't um
realize that in the moment and that
affects us are we getting you know you
talked about the abundance we have in
the world but are we getting
happier do you know any stats around
around our Collective happiness or how
we report on
that yeah I think a lot of the research
on happiness suggests that we are less
happy than we were um more mental health
problems as well we all know those stats
around Depression more mental health
problems yep and there's probably a
variety of reasons for that but I do
think that one one thing that's
interesting
um we seem to live in a world where uh
a lot of people have enough of what they
need to survive and if they don't it's
probably a governmental problem it's
probably a distribution problem um and
this I'm mainly talking about developed
countries here but as we've got more and
more and more we haven't necessarily
become more happy so for example I think
their year was from 1970 to about
2000 the real income of Americans grew
by 50% so this is um this factors in you
know price adjustments
inflation so people got 50% richer on
average yet happiness didn't change in
fact it might have actually decreased a
little bit so this suggests that once
our needs are met to a certain point
like it's not necessarily going to make
us happier yet we keep thinking that you
know happiness is going to be in the
next purchase that it's in the next meal
out that it's in the next uh viral tweet
or whatever it might be did they
discover an antidote for this sort of
incessant search for problems because
I'd like to be content
yeah well that that's the that's the
search right that's the that's the
ultimate human search I think that a lot
of uh religions they're set up to
counter
that right don't don't uh don't steal
because you're taking away from someone
else and Society falls apart don't be
gluttonous because that's going to give
you problems don't you know they're all
telling us don't overdo all these
worldly things that we tend to overdo
and instead the f is to you know take
the focus off
yourself and put it on something that
will help you um kind of do the next
right thing now those get interpreted in
ways that can be controversial of course
but I do think that the overall
architecture is the same and that is the
that is the ultimate question for all
people right my whole team here have got
more and more into running we speak
about running all the time and obviously
you know Daniel liberman who's been on
the show before I think he wrote well he
wrote a book on running didn't he it's
his last book the one we had a
conversation with on the show what's
your perspective on exercise running and
what did you learn when you studied um
nomadic tribes about the importance of
exercise yeah well I mean I do think
that um it's probably the best thing
that you can do for your health is
exercising and I think that um you know
a lot of people will say exercise is
medicine I think more that inactivity is
poison so we evolved to have a certain
amount of activity in our daily life
like we need that in order to be get a
certain to healthy and happy and we
often don't get that today the way we
design Our Lives um something I write
about in the comfort crisis
is uh the human body is good at two
things humans have all to be good at two
things one of them is running long
distances relatively slowly which I'm
sure Daniel liberman talked about
because he's the dude who discovered
that he's great but the other thing that
we are good at is carrying things for
distance so you you ask okay well why
are we good at this long distance
running in the Heat and it's because we
would chase down animals who are not
good at cooling themselves um for miles
and miles and miles until they
overheated and then we would kill them
and we would have our
meal but then what happens after you
kill an animal away from
Camp call an anci
Uber you got to carry back yeah and
we're the only uh we're the only animal
that can carry things for distance
well and that absolutely shaped us just
as much as running did so we've got
these hands that can grip things
strongly we're built in such a way that
um we can carry stuff for distance and I
argue in the comfort crisis a lot of
people still run like jogging is popular
but carrying things as a
workout is something that a lot of
people don't do and so I advocate for uh
rucking which is loading up a backpack
with weight and walking and when you
compare uh rucking to running rocking
tends to um be less injurious so people
the injury rate is much lower it also
preserves more
muscle than running does so when you run
you're burning fat but you're also
burning muscle when you rock because you
have weight on your body it's signaling
your body like don't burn quite quite as
much muscle and studies bear that out
um so you're kind of getting cardio and
weight training in one and I think it's
a good thing that people should be doing
I'm not saying don't ever run but I am
saying we've engineered this really
important form of human physical
activity which is carrying things for
long distances out of our lives and by
adding it back in I think we do get a
lot of different benefits how does the
modern body look different to the body
of our ancestors in that regard or these
um nomadic tribe tribes do they have
sort of cuz I imagine if they're if
they're carrying things in a world where
we can put it in the boot of a car or
find some other means using Wheels to
roll it they must be physiologically um
adapted in certain ways I think that
well I think that in my experience and
you would have to talk to Dan as well to
see if he um agrees with this but I do
think that most Hunter gathers are much
smaller than the average Westerner is
they're just much smaller because they
don't have as much food they're also far
more active and so they're not giant
people when you look at when you look at
people in the west today were giant
people in the grand scheme of time and
space who burns more calories uh well if
you did it per pound of body weight they
do like by far but when you they might
wait so you have to do it by how big the
person is right if you have two people
that are burning 3,000
calories great but if one person weigh
weighs 250 lb and the other weighs 120
lb well the person who's 120 lb is
burning far more for their body weight
and that's an important distinction that
needs to be made when we talk about do
hunter gatherers burn as many calories
as Westerner because there's some people
who are like well they burn the same
it's like yeah they're 100b on average
we're on average 200 lb like that's a
big difference the arms of the average
Prehistoric Women for example were 16%
stronger than those of today's women's
Olympic rowers yeah Jesus yeah they're
they're very fit people I mean they can
go there's this one um Anthropologist I
talked to who spent some time with
hunter gatherers in Tanzania and she
talked about how even the older people
in the tribe we're talking about you
know 70 80 year old women they can just
hike all day they can hurdle over rocks
like it's like they're monsters and I'm
like you know she's a 30-year-old woman
she's like I'm kind of trailing behind
these these women that are like two
almost three times my
age and that's because they've stayed
active in kept muscle mass right yeah
they stayed active and so when you think
about daily life
um a lot of it is effortful so they're
not just Co they're not just covering
ground they're covering ground that is
rough right it's all
Outdoors um that's going to require more
energy than a than a sidewalk they're
carrying stuff they're squatting they're
digging they're some of them will climb
trees even when they're resting they
might rest in the squat position where
we are going to rest in a lazy boy and
just melt into it right so there's this
all this I mean besides just the stuff
that we would look at and say like yeah
that's active I mean even just resting
is more active than we're they're always
undergoing some low level of physical
activity and now we've engineered so
much of that out of our lives and that's
undoubtedly changed us but we don't even
know it's like we're born into it right
because as a species we evolved to do
the next easiest most comfortable thing
so we have applied that with technology
ology to our
environments and it's good overall but
it's changed us it's changed our fitness
it's changed our physicality and once we
did that and realized oh we've taken out
all this physical activity out of our
lives and now we're getting sick for it
we go well I guess let's just like build
these buildings where um you just go and
you know maybe you run on a belt and
maybe you pick up some uh weights that
are perfectly balanced and you do that
you know how about three sets of 10
that's what we'll call it right so when
we we basically invented exercise right
and it's not the same as we used to
necessarily do in the past I'm not
saying that there's anything wrong with
that but I just saying that the way that
we are Physically Active today even that
has changed greatly like no one in the
past would have tried to get Giant and
lift a bunch of Weights that it doesn't
make sense to have all this extra muscle
you didn't have enough food to grow it
you didn't want to be carrying that
around on your persons I mean think of
mountain climbers they don't like bulk
up for a climb right they don't get huge
and jacked it's like no you need to be
strong for your weight you need to be as
strong as possible for your weight but
you don't want to have any excess weight
and today you have people who are like I
just want to be like 250 pounds of pure
muscle it's going to be awesome people
always people have been saying to me
that calisthenics is one of the more
important exercises probably for that
very reason that lifting your body
weight is probably the central being
able to move your body is the most
important thing not having massive guns
yeah and I think it is a strange thing
like there is some research that says
that muscle mass um is good for
longevity and protective um a lot of
those studies are often conducted um
looking at people who are sarcopenic and
there's a difference between people who
have a dangerously low level of muscle
mass and those who just have a ton just
to have it I think probably The Sweet
Spot is just be in a as much as BMI is a
controversial measurement I think
probably be in a BMI that is normal and
try and be strong for your weight and do
a bunch of cardiovascular exercise I
mean just look at like what did humans
do for all of time that's probably a
pretty good road map to try and mimic
and you tend to find that those people
aren't that giant Daniel liberman said
something to me which is clearly so
obvious but really did shock me he said
when he spoke to these sort of hunter
gatherer tribe
communities they almost laughed at him
when he asked them what they do for
exercise because the concept of exercise
is not something they think about
because they're exercising all day so I
think he remarked that one of those
communities turned around him and was
like why would you run for
fun totally yeah they he was go what do
you do for exercise and they probably
said what the hell's exercise literally
like oh he said like something like
training what do you do to train and
they were like training like we it's
part of our life is exercise well that's
how it was for all of us forever like no
one moved just to move because our
lifestyles in the past were we had to
just move for work and you wouldn't want
to do any extra because you were moving
all day for labor I mean this was Farm
labor really taxing most people worked
in agriculture um until the Industrial
Revolution um exercise is something that
we invented once we engineered movement
out of our Lives you took about a second
ago about exercise as a psychological
act I.E once upon a time when we were
out in nature exercising we would be
psychologically stimulated because there
might be a bear or I don't know a lineon
coming at us so we we're we're moving
our bodies but our mind is so attuned to
everything happening around us now as
you said we're on in these gyms with
these rubber belts and we're watching
like I don't know we're like looking at
the screen or watching Netflix or just
yeah whatever real housewise on the on
the treadmill does that having exercise
be a psychological act where it's
psychologically stimulating through the
when you're doing it does that matter
yeah why I just wrote a deep dive about
this on my newsletter um which I call 2%
we can I can explain why I call it 2%
but when you think about the context of
exercise um that we used to do in the
past there are so many more things
happening than just
the physical work of moving your body
across the land so as you're moving take
take something like trail
running you're having to figure out okay
well where am I going to place each foot
because the trail might be Rocky you
might even not even be on a trail so
you're having to figure out what what is
my foot placement you're also having to
factor in okay how am I going to Pace
myself knowing I have this distance to
go knowing that it is this hot outside
knowing that I have this much water with
me you're also having to factor in
things in the periphery like are there
wild animals out there and if you are
running because you are say hunting in
the past you're having to track the
animal that is an exceedingly
psychologically taxing act you're
looking at you're going okay well we got
a broken Branch there oh looks like
there's a blood spatter from that you
know Arrow we put in it it is if running
on a treadmill is like
addition running outside in the context
that we would have run outside is like
multivar calculus and there's a
researcher at USC named David rein and
he's thought about this a lot and he
basically thinks that you know when you
compare running indoors staring at a
screen your brain just kind of shuts off
you don't really have to do much
cognitive work as you do this exercise
yes it is good for your cardiovascular
health he will say but when you exercise
Outdoors especially if it's in sort of
Wilder nature like on a trail think
running on a trail you're having to do a
lot of cognitive work as you do that and
that might be better for brain health as
well in the long run for people not to
mention outdoor exercise exercise is
also harder you're probably going to
burn more calories per step you're going
to have more ups and downs you're going
to have like it's just it's just better
overall how much do you really know
about your health for me that answer was
simple the answer was very little until
whoop came along as you guys know they
sponsor this podcast but even before
then who was integral for me to know
what's going on inside my body most of
my friends my family and my team now use
W but I still have a few friends that
are on the fence about getting on board
and what I hear from some of those
friends is that they're a little bit
worried about what they might see in the
data and they might feel uncomfortable
about knowing what's going on inside
their body if I learned anything it is
that knowledge is power and once I
finally started to look at the data and
understand how getting less sleep was
affecting my body and how my old
lifestyle was actually hurting my
long-term Health everything changed for
the better so if this is something that
you'd like to try out head over to join.
whoop.com
CEO and you'll get to try whoop for 30
days risk-free with zero commitment try
it and let me know how you get on as
you'll know this podcast is sponsored by
H and we're going into that last quarter
of the year it's getting a little bit
colder back into our routines back into
our work rhythms and it's in those
moments that I need to focus most on my
diet as I get back into the swing of
work I need to get back into a routine
as it relates to my diet and that's
really where hu's RTD they're ready to
drink range comes in handy in a bottle
you have a nutritionally complete meal
that you can consume in a minute so this
is a real Lifesaver in terms of my
health it is my Ally and my friend and
my companion on my busiest days and it
means that even when I'm pursuing all of
my professional goals my health goals
can be pursued at the same time there's
a link in the description below if
you've never tried heels rtds this is
the time if you're falling off with a
wagon this is the sign you needed to get
back on there's a link below in the
description order yourself a pack stay
healthy throughout this busy period
Daniel also opened my eyes to something
I had just before I spoke to Daniel I
had an issue with my feet I had what
they call is it planta fitis mhm I woke
up one day and I basically couldn't walk
because something in my foot had like
swollen up and then I Googled it and
they said it's plop fitis and the
hypothesis so I I was then given these
ins cels to kind of try and correct it
the hypothesis that I then later
discovered was that because my feet are
so weak because I walk around every day
in these like one-in cushion shoes that
we all do and there's this whole
industry about like heel size and how
that makes running and exercise and
comfort better and it's how it's better
for you or better for your knees when I
suddenly started exerting a lot of
effort onto my feet because I was
training for a big football match my
feet just gave away and that made me
start to believe that maybe I'm not
supposed to have these massive like 1
inch 1 cm whatever heels soles that we
all have on our shoes imagine if from
the second a child was born we put a
glove on both of their hands that was 1
cmet de side imagine how like weak and
pathetic their hands would be that's
essentially what we're doing to our feet
and so now I don't wear shoes that have
a like a like a soul I have barefoot
shoes yeah we're supposed to have a
certain amount of inputs strengthwise
and I think that we don't get those in a
lot of ways I mean it's not just it's
not just the shoes right it's also okay
well why does everyone's back hurt
because 80% of people people will
experience back payment some point in
their life and you go okay well you know
we all sit 8 hours a day and we're not
sitting like in the squatting position
like we used to we're sitting in these
chairs that are comfortable that take
the um physical work we used to have to
do just to keep our torso up off our
back and so then when we go to say Lift
something our back muscles are
exceedingly weak and something happens
and we get a problem right and you can
extend that to many different problems
like average pains that people have it's
usually because our environments are set
up to take the physical stress off our
bodies but we eventually end up paying a
price for that when we try and do
something out of that very small comfort
zone that we've built ourselves so in
the case of you it's you know you had
weakened your feet over time and then
you add uh load onto them and they're
not ready for that and that manifests
itself as pain for another person it
could be they sit at a desk all day and
they just decid you know I'm going to go
back into the gymm and they do one
deadlift and their back just goes what
are you doing and sends a bunch of pain
there and it's a lot of different things
shoulder shoulder pain a lot a lot of
different pains are just manifestations
of our modern environment and to avoid
those you said 80% of people will
experience back pain at some time yeah
it's the most common pain that people
will experience and it's also it has a
huge economic toll it's yeah it's pretty
crazy as soon as you said that my back
started to feel painful I don't yeah so
a very a very simple a very simple fix
is spending more time sitting on the
floor
having your back um having to prop it up
like I am now I'm not using the back
rest you know if I do this your back has
to do more work and even just that low
level of work across time can help
prevent some problems you said sitting
on the floor yep sitting on the floor
that helps with Mobility um when you're
sitting on the floor you don't have this
giant back rest that you can just melt
into your um your body has to do work to
keep yourself upright right and you're
probably going to get uncomfortable at
some point so you're going to shift
around you're going to put your hips
into different positions you're going to
put your legs in different positions um
it seems to help with mobility and with
pain over time what are that's really
useful because that's a small thing that
I can do to to reduce my chances of
being part of the 80% that will
experience back pain sitting on the
floor more often I can do that what are
the other small day-to-day decisions
that we could all make to give ourselves
a little bit of healthy discomfort in
our lives yeah so I I call this concept
being a two-center and um it comes from
a study that found that 2% of people
take the stairs when there is also an
escalator available
2% now 100% of those people knew that
taking the stairs would give them a
long-term benefit on their health right
but only 2% taken and that's because
we're a species who's wired to do the
next comfortable thing even when it
doesn't make sense in our comfortable
environment so when I talk about being a
2center I'm talking about taking the
acttion ual and the metaphorical stairs
when you can what are the small things
that you can do in daily life in order
to add more activity more discomfort
into your life in a way that is totally
manageable that adds up to a giant
return over time a giant return over
time taking the stairs a giant return
over time if you take the stairs every
single time I guarantee that you will
have better health than if you were to
take that escalator and if you apply
that across the board I mean something
as simple as okay I have a work phone
call I can sit in my office and take it
in this sort of you know dim office or I
can go take it while walking and I've
snuck in a mile and a half of walking oh
and by the way you know maybe next time
I'm going to throw on a 10 PB rock or a
20 lb Ruck and I'm going to be rcking
while I take that phone call um I'm
going to park in the parking lot that is
like Siberia away from the grocery store
right and it sounds like people's like
people will say shrug their shoulders
yeah everyone knows that it's like okay
well why the hell doesn't anyone do it
because they don't believe it matters
and the problem is is that we look at
that act as just one individual act and
go okay well that might only burn five
more calories okay well what if you did
that 10 times a day and extrapolated it
over a lifetime I guarantee you will end
up healthier and better off than if you
consistently were doing the easier thing
so where can I find those little 2% wins
flow them into my life because once you
start doing it you realize like oh not
only is this very easy to do but I
actually feel better when I do this
stuff right you could carry your
groceries like a lot of back pain would
go away if people started carrying their
groceries more often I can guarantee
that but we don't do that and um so a
lot of my work and thinking is how do we
find those little winds across the day
and pile them up I'm not saying that
people should stop going to the gym and
doing their normal routine but I am
saying if you're looking at 24 hours in
a day and you are doing the next easiest
most comfortable most lazy thing for 23
and 1/2 hours and you think that your 30
minutes in the gym is going to recoup
that you're missing you're missing the
big picture that is not how humans are
designed to live I was thinking as you
were talking about how it compounds for
or against you as well so in the example
you gave about the taking the stairs
versus the escalator might burn five
calories and then you times that by 10
you do it time you know then that's 50
calories you're burning a day I was
thinking is there a pounding element to
this my brain decided there was because
if you take the stairs and you burn
calories and build up a little bit of
muscle you then have more muscle to do
more activities like that and I think I
think it was Daniel liberman that told
me about this concept of syence which is
almost this downward spiral of M muscle
Decay where you like lose muscle so you
you do less activity so you lose muscle
so you do less activity and that's the
spiral downward for a lot of people that
causes aging and death what we think of
aging and ultimately death um and that's
what I thought of in those small things
I thought like it is going to compound
for me if I do it more I'll be able to
do it more so I'll probably do it more
you know exactly no and you're
absolutely right and you know the
concept isn't even just physical it's
it's psychological it's being willing to
have the hard conversation you need to
have with um your spouse being you know
if you're working on a hard project our
tendency is when the hard project gets
hard what do we do we we check our cell
phone we go I'm going to get up and get
caught
being willing to go through put in that
extra little work to kind of push
through that thing that's just going to
be a little bit harder I think
ultimately leads to the biggest
transformation and breakthroughs I used
to think you could change your beliefs
you know and then I really got quite
obsessed with figuring out if you could
choose a different belief and I
concluded that you couldn't because
there's no belief in my life that I
genuinely believe that I now if my
family was held at gunpoint could
genuinely change I could lie but I
couldn't actually change the belief so I
thought what a beliefs and concluded
that they are essentially a stack of
evidence that we've accepted as
subjectively true and that is governing
Our Lives it's telling us who we are and
how we show up especially in situations
of discomfort it's the I remember I had
Chris Eubank Jr on the podcast and he's
like a world championship boxer and he
said to me if I'm home alone and I get
to mile 9 on the treadmill and I told
myself I was going to do 10 I will limp
um and I get cramp in my leg I have to
limp The Last Mile even if no one's
watching because quote I can't let the
demons in
what he's what he's saying there is I
can't let a new self story emerge that
I'm the type of person that quits when
it's hard because in round 12 of a
championship boxing fight that story
will emerge when I'm on the stool and I
want to quit this idea and it kind of
goes back to you're saying about the
stairs that all of these small things
are compounding psychologically to tell
us a story about who we are and our
relationship with discomfort and that
like you know the greatest way to
influence our self story is to start
keeping uncomfortable commitments with
ourselves and that will compound for us
over time yeah and then once you take
the stairs you you be like okay maybe I
could do that run that three mile run oh
now I'm doing five I think that you know
you're right about the stories we tell
ourselves and where they come from but
you can change the experiences that you
have right so your experiences will
change that set of beliefs it's like the
story I told about me spending the month
in the Arctic I didn't think I could
ever do that and I hadn't ever had any
reason to be that deeply appreciative of
the world today I had to go have this
experience that changed my perception
evidence right I could tell myself all
day yeah hot running water's great but
did I ever feel that emotionally like a
legit emotional connection and this like
oh my God like you peel the veil back no
I had to go do um I had to have an
experience outside of your comfort zone
outside of my comfort zone right an
experience that um was tough and
challenging and that is ultimately the
hero's journey that you see in you know
the work of Joseph Campbell analyzes all
these myths throughout time finds that
all cultures basically have the exact
same structure behind their myths and
that's that the hero gets called to
Adventure but by the way it's going to
be hard it's going to be challenging and
the person doesn't want to go right
there's always this phase where they go
I don't want to deal with this but if
they choose to accept that they're
always going to enter this Middle Ground
that's really trying that's really
challenging they're going to struggle
down there but in the struggle is where
you learn what you're capable of the
reality is is that humans are capable of
way more than we think but we don't get
thrust into positions to realize this
anymore and that is the teacher you have
to throw yourself into the abyss and you
get down there and you swim through the
fog and you figure out your and
then you come out the other side and go
oh I got more on board than I real
realized and that changes you
permanently changes what you're capable
of
forever and then if you're lucky you'll
get another Callo adventure and have
more problems in your life and get
another opportunity to iterate again and
you just keep peeling off layers peeling
off layers that's the human story of
improvement to me but most of us are
waiting for evidence to go on the
adventure we we don't realize that the
evidence will come from the adventure
right well I think that that's one way
that things have changed um in the past
humans used to have to do hard things
the time this could be from these big
hunts we used to have to go on it could
be that a storm rolls in and you're like
we need to get we need to get over this
mountain range in the next 24 hours or
else we're going to die and by the way
this mountain range is huge I don't know
if we can do it so we get Thrust out of
our comfort zone all the time and we
have these moments where we realize what
we're capable of because we go in there
we go I'm pretty sure we're going to die
Crossing this mountain range but we
don't die go oh wow I had way more on
board than I realized well that's
something and and that changes you it
shapes you it makes you realize what
you're capable of and life no longer
thrusts these things onto us anymore
right you can just kind of live in the
comfort zone now and it's nice it's
comfortable it's safe but you don't get
to go out on those edges and learn what
you're capable of and that ultimately I
think limits you over time so you're
telling everyone to quit their
jobs like you I'm telling everyone to
take uh two weeks off and go do
something totally kickass that will
change you forever because we can all do
that our relationship with uncertainty
though is at the very heart of this I
think because when people are thinking
about venturing off on that Adventure
leaving their job going and do something
new uncertainty seems to be this
headwind that holds Us in place and I
remember studying um the work that Uber
Labs had done so that's Uber the app the
food and um uh taxi app yeah they do
everything in their lab they'd figured
out that one of the worst parts of C any
customer experience was the feeling of
uncertainty so once upon a time you
called a taxi then you'd stand on the
side of the road and just be in total
uncertainty um so they factored in
factored that into the app by showing
you where the driver is and also we can
all
intuitively agree but also can recount
times where a plane was delayed and it
said delayed and the the feeling of the
uncertainty versus just saying delayed
two hours which I'd much rather prefer
at the heart of going on the adventures
of Our Lives Time Life times and
throwing ourselves into discomfort is
our our need for certainty
that holds like when I speak to people
on the streets or they DM me that is the
conundrum that they face is I don't know
what the future holds if I go off on
that Adventure so I'd rather just stay
in certain misery than than have to
endure the uncertainty that that Journey
might you know bring my way yeah I we
don't like uncertainty but there's uh as
I was reporting the scarcity brain I I
ended up reading a lot of strange old
texts
text and I read this uh the writings of
this monk who lived in silence in a cave
in the 1800s in France um he wrote uh he
published his journals he didn't use his
name because he didn't want any Fame he
didn't want anyone to know and there's
this quote in the book that goes you
risk so much hesitating to fling
yourself into the abyss that is the damn
truth especially in the context of today
what's the worst that could happen
you're not going to die even if you lose
everything you own we've got a lot of
safety nets today and do you think
you're a relatively intelligent person
have you figured it out in the past well
you can probably figure it out again and
if you're not willing to embrace that
uncertainty that is actually a feature
not a bug because that uncertainty gives
you
opportunities if you're certain what
you're going to get well that's not any
damn exciting right I mean you it's not
exciting that's what you talk about in
the scarcity brain yeah unpredictability
is exciting it's captivating and so yeah
the outcome could be bad but it could
also be really really good way better
than you thought but and by not taking
that gamble you're kind of sitting on
the sidelines oh so chapter nine of
scarcity brain you talk about something
that I joked about for many years as a
marketeer I went around telling CMOS
around the world and CEOs that if you
want your people your team members to do
the very best work of their lives and
the most specifically the most
Innovative and creative work of their
lives withhold budgets and I say this
because my first company was called
wallpark
and it was only when we ran out of
money that's that we did our best work
because we had no choice so we I I don't
know I had like 6,000 as a marketing
budget or something and then I remember
being sat there with with my two buddies
who were building the business with me
Ash and Dom and we ran out of money and
from that came an idea that would help
me to build a company that was worth
several hundreds of millions of dollars
it was
in having less resources that we were
forced to do the most creative best work
of our lives and it drove us to First
principles and that's what I read when
you were talking about this study at the
University of Illinois um and John John
Hopkins that's kind of what I I thought
ah it's true yeah people
people become more creative we try to
innovate when resources are scarce when
we have a bunch of resources what we do
is we kind of do whatever everyone else
is doing and so I think that um when you
look at humans we're sort of designed to
add our default is to add more to do
more to whatever and we often look for
the sort of easy way out when you remove
resources so we're not able to do that
in the same way that kind of everyone
else is I think we get forced into
Innovation and creativity so are we lazy
are abundant humans
lazy
um I don't love the L word don't worry I
said it you didn't say it then I'll go
then I will agree with
you I think that look I think that we
are designed to kind of do the easy
thing I think that having to come up
with a crazy idea it takes work and
maybe we don't do that if we have the
resources to just throw money at the
problem and this kind of explains why
companies as they get bigger although
they have more intellectual Capital they
have more brains in their offices they
seem to become less Innovative also it
speaks to the whole loss aversion thing
but they they tend to probably default
to Convention and obvious I think you
want to be light you want to be fast you
want to be able to you have it sounds
counterintuitive but it's almost like
you have more options when you're
smaller right when you have less because
you could like the world is open we got
to figure this out and there's all these
things that no one else is saying
because we're just forced to make a
decision given this small budget that we
have and that study at the University of
Illinois and John Hopkins um you talk
about these Six studies where
participants who faced scarce resources
performed better yeah in what way they
came up with ideas that were more
Innovative they used less
resources interesting yeah so when they
had less resources they actually used
less resources yeah and their ideas were
better
yep interesting it also kind of explains
why being an underdog and holding on to
that mentality regardless of your
success is probably a good thing it's
like a psychological state of we're not
there yet I say this to my teams all the
time about our biggest risk now is like
thinking you've made it yeah because you
can let off the gas when you've made it
and you can just be complacent you have
more resources you can do the obvious
stuff you can do what got you here less
incentive to innovate and try new things
why would we we're doing well yeah so
for I mean for you guys it might be okay
we know this stuff has worked in the
past
at a certain point we have to realize
that it's not always going to work so
how are we devoting um time to figuring
out these things that people are
overlooking that might benefit from
fewer resources right maybe it's like
exercises where one day every month
you're going if we had X budget what
would we do now it's kind of different
because in the back of their minds
people are going yeah but we got plenty
of money MH um but I think trying to
figure out okay what would we do if we
have this budget could be a good
exercise to kind of keep lean and be
able to try stuff the saddest line in
your book was the line that we are
experiencing a rising tide of global
sadness chapter TW
11 how do you how do you quantify that
rise in global sadness that's just based
on some research that's out there um the
United States is definitely has become
unhappier over the years and I think
you're seeing this in a lot of other
developed Nations too and yeah it is it
those a little bit sad usage of the word
love hared between n 1965 and
2015 in in songs yeah so in yeah there
are some researchers that analyzed a
bunch of lyrics in songs that had come
out from the 60s to what was the year n
1965 to 2015 yep and they found that the
word love nice positive words um haved
and negative words like hate increased
Jesus yeah and Global unhappiness hit a
record high this is the stat I was
looking for Global unhappiness hit a
record high in
2021 um according to a source so
interesting what is the what is the
antidote then bringing it right back
down to you know the individual level MH
the two become a 2% person right right
but when I have this ancient Hardware
that's given me this scarcity brain what
can I do how can I take back control of
my life and live my life more aligned
with with my long-term goals and dreams
we live in a world where you know
there's a million things we're told we
need to do to be happy it's like you got
to do this you got to do that and
there's all this research about it but I
think that really when you look at what
makes people happy it's when they
accomplish things that weren't always
easy now that could be from like I
mentioned before like you spend this
time alone and get to know yourself
better like that's not that's not always
easy but you come out on the other side
of that better I think it's being
willing to do things that are ultim
going to be uncomfortable they're going
to be hard and being okay with that in
fact embracing that journey is the human
story to me and I think that as the
world has gotten um easier more
comfortable safer in a lot of ways and
we have this default to just kind of sit
there in that zone I don't think that's
necessarily become good for us and that
could be you can apply that to all
different things I mean it's that
literal and metaphorical taking of the
stairs could be okay if I feel like I'm
lonely well I can sit here and be lonely
or I can join I don't know a softball
team or a cricket
team um and yeah it's going to be
awkward when I meet these new people do
I think it's going to be easy no but
that could enhance my life and you can
apply that to everything I think it's
being willing like that that monk wrote
to throw yourself into the abyss and
have a human experience because life is
not supposed to be easy all the time and
in fact if it is people tend to go a
little bit nuts and get unhappy and so
pushing against that I think is a good
thing overall for people you must now
look at the world having studied all of
these things and especially living in
Vegas and seeing those gas stations and
that have the roulette machines in
them do you think that corporations and
uh these businesses are like a little
bit evil a little bit morally bankrupt
well this gets into this larger question
um so what we have to realize is that a
lot of these behaviors are fun and
rewarding in the short term so take I
don't know Tik Tok feeding you the exact
algorithm that's going to capture your
attention that is fun and rewarding okay
and so if you were to say well you need
to stop doing that then the response
from Tik Tok would be okay so you're
telling us to basically give people
boring content that they don't want as
much do we want to live in that world
I don't think so should slot machines be
less fun should it be less fun to watch
YouTube should Netflix design itself to
be boring what my message really is is
that I'm not saying don't ever do these
things but I think we need to realize
that we often times fall into these
behaviors for reasons we're not entirely
aware of so if you're the if you want to
spend 15 hours a day on Tik Tok hell
yeah go for it but I want you to make
that decision consciously and I think
today
they a lot of Corporations know the
decision is not being made consciously
that's the reality but at the same time
I don't know if the antidote is going to
be leave us any better because then we
start regulating everything and I don't
think we want that so really what I want
to do is Empower people to realize you
have the capacity to make choice I want
you to be more aware of why you're doing
what you're doing because ultimately
that is where Freedom lies like if we
start punishing corporations it's like
you're treating the public like children
and I was going to say the one ethical
Casino would just go bankrupt right and
it wouldn't exist but I think about that
throughout Society the one social
platform that didn't play to our
scarcity brain would not exist it
wouldn't have users so it just would it
would become extinct so and then also if
you think about it on like a
geographical um on a global scale if we
just banned it in the United States or
the UK a lot of the Innovation and
opportunity just moves off to China or
to some other place where they
capitalize on the scarcity brain yeah so
it's all about being being conscious
intentional and that starts with exactly
what you've done in your book really
which is starts with
awareness and that's why your book is so
brilliant both of the books are
fantastic the Comfort crisis is superb
and as I said to you before we started
recording I had so many people come on
the podcast and quote things from the
book but then also this term the Comfort
crisis I've had over and over and over
again and that comes back to you you
said something to me before we started
recording that the sales of this book
have increased since um publication it's
not typical yeah they've increased over
time we're selling more every week now
two and a half three years later than we
were yeah because right when it came out
people can relate to the symptoms I
guess yeah I think it's just a word of
mouth thing I think that people read it
and they relate to it and if they pick
up some of the you know suggestions from
the book I think it changes them for the
better you know I've had a lot of people
that have really changed their life from
the book and I told you before we
started recording that when I do this
podcast I make notes beforehand and I
don't think I've ever made more notes
than I did reading these two books
because it's all subject matter that I'm
absolutely obsessed with so the scarcity
brain which is the newer book says fix
your craving mindset and rewire your
habits to thrive with enough um superb
superb I'll link both of them in the
description below so if anybody wants to
get the books and understand why I was
so passionate about having this
conversation today but why I love these
books so much you'll find them in the
description below we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're going to
be leaving it
for and the question that's been
left for you is what makes you
happiest uh what makes me happiest
is probably when I am in my office and
it is 5: in the morning and my dog is
there sleeping and I am writing and it
is absolute hell and then bam the line
comes in and I go that is how it all
fits together the puzzle piece is
suddenly merge and I'm just like totally
present aware and the words come and
also knowing that once I get through
with that writing I'm going to be able
to hang out with my wife who is my
favorite person she's the one for me and
it's that it's very simple thank you so
much Michael really appreciate the
conversation and I feel smarter having
spoke to you I will quote you for many
many conversations I know going forward
because as I said this is the subject's
matter that I'm obsessed with at the
moment so thank you for um thank you for
giving this message to the world I think
it's a message that can save us in a lot
of ways that we need to be saved that
that's the TD of what I think about this
and all the indicators say that if there
was ever a time where we needed to
understand how our brain is working and
being taken advantage of so we can take
back control but also the importance of
discomfort it is is now CU things are
only going to get easier yeah and more
comfortable thank you I appreciate you
having me on man it was really fun enjoy
the conversation I appreciate you uh
talking about the books yeah getting
them out in the world and having your
stamp of approval is awesome so
[Music]
thanks quick one we are working with an
exciting new sponsor on this podcast
Shopify I'm sure you guys have heard of
Shopify if you haven't been living under
a rock but for those that don't know
Shopify is a Commerce platform
revolutionizing millions of businesses
worldwide it is pretty incredible they
provide everything you need to start
your business and it's super simple to
get started and to get your business out
there here at the D CEO we've used
Shopify for a variety of our different
product drops the latest being the
conversation cards and without the help
of Shopify that wouldn't have been
possible it's mine and my team's go-to
website for all things Commerce related
so I'm giving you guys the chance to
trial Shopify for $1 that's right $1
sign up for for a $1 trial for a month
by searching shopify.com
Bartlet all lowercase keep it to
yourself and let me know how you get on
do you need a podcast to listen to next
we've discovered that people who liked
this episode also tend to absolutely
love another recent episode we've done
so I've linked that episode in the
description below I know you'll enjoy
it
[Music]
ah